THE PREPARATION.

1. A Hymn may be sung

An Appropriate sentence may be used (See Appendix III)

2. President: I will bless the Lord at all times.
All:   His praise shall continually be in my mouth.

President:     O magnify the Lord with me,
All:   And let us exalt his name together.

President:     This is the day which the Lord has made
All:  Let us rejoice and be glad in it.

Or Advent/Lent

President:     Bless the Lord who forgives our sins,
All:   God’s mercy endures for ever.

Or Christmas

President:     Christ our Lord is born for us,
All:    Come let us adore Him.

Or Easter Day to Pentecost

President:     Alleluia! Christ is risen,
All:  He is risen indeed, Alleluia!

Or Pentecost

President:     The Lord is here
All:   His Spirit is with us.

3. Collect for purity:

All:  Almighty God,
to whom all hearts are open,
all desires known,
and from whom no secrets are hidden:
Cleanse the thoughts of our hearts
by the inspiration of Your Holy Spirit,
that we may perfectly love You,
and worthily magnify Your Holy Name;
through Christ our Lord. Amen.

4. GLORIA IN EXCELSIS (may be said or sung)

All: Glory be to God in the highest,
and peace to His people on earth.
Lord God, heavenly King,
Almighty God and Father.
We worship You, we give You thanks
we praise You for Your glory.
Lord Jesus Christ, only Son of the Father,
Lord God, Lamb of God,
You take away the sin of the world;
have mercy on us;
You are seated at the right hand of the Father;
receive our prayer.
For You alone are the Holy One,
You alone are the Lord,
You alone are the Most High,
Jesus Christ,
with the Holy Spirit,
in the glory of God the Father. Amen.
 

 
ACT OF PENITENCE

The Decalogue or else the Summary of the Law shall be said or sung on Sundays. At other times, instead thereof, the Kyrie or the Trisagion may be sung or said.

(a) The Commandments

President: Our Lord Jesus Christ said: If you love me, Keep my commandments; (Jn. 14:15) happy are those who hear the word of God and keep it. (Lk. 11:28) Hear then these commandments which God has given to His people, and take them to heart.

I am the Lord your God; you shall have no other gods but me (Exod. 20:2,3). You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all your soul, with all your mind and with all your strength (Deut. 6.4,5; Mt. 22:37).

All:   Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

President: You shall not make for yourself any idol (Exod. 20:4). God is Spirit, and those who worship Him. must worship in spirit and in truth (Jn. 4:24).

All:   Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

President: You shall not dishonour the name of the Lord your God (Exod. 20:7). You shall worship Him with awe and reverence (Heb. 12:28).

All:   Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

President: Remember the Lord’s day and keep it holy (Exod. 20:8) Christ is risen from the dead (1 Cor. 15:20): set your minds on things that are above not on things that are on earth (Col. 3:2)

All:   Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

President: Honour your father and mother (Exod. 20:12) Live as servants of God; honour all people; love the brotherhood (1 Pet. 2:16b, 17a).

All:   Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

President: You shall not commit murder (Exod. 20:13). Be reconciled to your neighbour (Rom. 12:10a), over come evil with good (Rom. 12:21).

All:   Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

President: You shall not commit adultery (Exod 20:14). Know that your body is a temple of the Holy Spirit (1 Cor. 6:19).

All:   Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

President: You shall not steal (Exod. 20:15). Be honest in all that you do and care for those in need (Deut. 15:11)

All:   Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

President: You shall not be a false witness (Exod. 20:16). Let every one speak the truth, (Zech. 8:16; Eph. 4:25).

All:   Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

President: You shall not covet anything which belongs to your neighbour (Exod 20:17). Remember the words of the Lord Jesus: It is more blessed to give than to receive (Acts 20:35b). Love your neighbour as yourself (Lk. 10:27b), for love is the fulfilling of the law. (Rom. 13:10b).

All:   Lord, have mercy upon us, and write all these Your laws in our hearts, we pray You.

OR

SUMMARY OF THE LAW

(b)

President: Our Lord Jesus Christ said:

“Hear O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord: and you shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your mind, and with all your strength. This is the first commandment. And the second is like, namely this: You shall love your neighbour as yourself. There is no other commandment greater than these. On these two commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets.

All: Lord, have mercy upon us, and write all these Your laws in our hearts.

OR

(c)

KYRIE ELEISON
(i)
President:   Lord have mercy
All:            Lord have mercy

President:   Lord have mercy
All:            Lord have mercy

President:   Lord have mercy
All:            Lord have mercy

OR

(ii)
Lord have mercy
Lord have mercy
Lord have mercy

Christ have mercy
Christ have mercy
Christ have mercy

Lord have mercy
Lord have mercy
Lord have mercy

OR

(d) TRISAGION

President:   Holy God,
All:            Holy and Mighty, Holy and Immortal, have mercy upon us.

President:   Holy God,
All:            Holy and Mighty, Holy and Immortal, have mercy upon us.

President:   Holy God,
All:            Holy and Mighty, Holy and Immortal, have mercy upon us.
 

 
6. President may say:

God so loved the world that He gave His only Son Jesus Christ to save us from our sins, to be our Advocate in heaven, and to bring us to eternal life.

Or One or more these SENTENCES

Hear the words of comfort our Saviour Christ says to all who truly turn to Him: Come to me, all who labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. (Mt. 11:28).

God so loved the world that He gave His only Son that whosoever believes in Him should not perish but have eternal life. (Jn 3:16).

Hear what St. Paul says: This saying is true and worthy of full acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners (1 Tim. 1:15)

Hear also what St. John says: If any one sins, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous; and He is the propitiation for our sins (1 Jn. 2:1)

A Brief pause

7. President: Let us confess our sins, in penitence and faith, firmly resolved to keep God’s commandments and to live in love and peace with all people; meekly kneeling upon our knees.

All:   Almighty God, our heavenly Father,
We have sinned against You
and against our neighbours,
in thought and word and deed,
through negligence, through weakness,
through our own deliberate fault.
We have not sufficiently walked according to the mind of Christ.
We have named the name of Christ,
but have not departed from iniquity.
We are truly sorry, and repent of all our sins.
For the sake of Your Son Jesus Christ,
who died for us, forgive us all that is past,
and grant that we may serve You in newness of life,
to the glory of Your name. Amen.

President:   Almighty God,
who forgives all who truly repent,
have mercy upon you,
pardon and deliver you from all your sins,
confirm and strengthen you in all goodness,
and keep you in life eternal;
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

All:   Amen.

The follows the Collect for the Day

President:   The Lord be with you
All:           And also with you
President:   Let us pray.

(The President says the Collect)
 

 
THE MINISTRY OF THE WORD

(Congregation sits)

OLD TESTAMENT READING

At the end, the reader shall say:
This is the word of the Lord.

All:   Thanks be to God.

A PSALM shall be used. (Congregation may sit or stand)

NEW TESTAMENT READING (Congregation sits)

EPISTLE

At the end the reader shall say:
This is the word of the Lord

All:   Thanks be to God.

10. A CANTICLE or HYMN may be used as GRADUAL, during which Gospel procession to the centre of the nave could be made (if so desired).

Congregation stands and faces the reader
THE GOSPEL when it is announced

GOSPEL

All:    Glory to Christ our Saviour.

At the end, the reader shall say:
This is the Gospel of Christ.

All:   Praise to Christ our Lord.

(A hymn may be sung)

11. Congregation sits

THE SERMON

12. Congregation Stands

THE NICENE CREED

All:   We believe in one God,
the Father, the Almighty,
maker of heaven and earth,
of all that is seen and unseen.
We believe in one Lord, Jesus Christ,
the only Son of God,
eternally begotten of the Father
God from God, Light from Light,
true God from true God,
begotten, not made,
of one being with the Father
Through Him all things were made.
For us men and for our salvation,
He came down from heaven;
by the power of the Holy Spirit
He became incarnate of the Virgin Mary
and was made man.
For our sake He was crucified under Pontius Pilate:
He suffered death and was buried.
On the third day He rose again
in accordance with the scriptures;
He ascended into heaven,
and is seated at the right hand of the Father.
He will come again in glory,
to judge the living and the dead,
and His kingdom will have no end.
We believe in the Holy Spirit,
the Lord, the Giver of life,
who proceeds from the Father and the Son.
With the Father and the Son
He is worshipped and glorified;
He has spoken through the prophets.
We believe in one, Holy,
Catholic and Apostolic Church;
we acknowledge one baptism
for the forgiveness of sins.
We look for the resurrection of the dead,
and the life of the world to come. Amen.
 

 
13. THE INTERCESSION

Intercession and thanksgiving are led by the President or by other person appointed. One of the forms below or other suitable forms may be used.

This form may be used: with the insertion of specific subjects between the paragraphs: as a continuous whole with or without brief biddings. Not all paragraphs need be used on every occasion: individual names may be added at the places indicated.

This response may be used before or after each paragraph.

President:  Lord in your mercy.
All:           Hear our prayer.

President:  Let us pray for the Church and for the world, and let us thank God for His goodness.

Almighty God, our heavenly Father, You promised through Your Son Jesus Christ to hear us when we pray in faith. Strengthen N. our Archbishop, N. our Bishop and all Your Church in the service of Christ, that those who confess Your name may be united in Your truth, live together in Your love, and reveal Your glory in the world.

Bless and guide our rulers; give wisdom to all in authority; and direct this and every nation in the ways of justice and of peace; that people may honour one another, and seek the common good.

Give grace to us, our families and friends, and to all our neighbours; that we may serve Christ in one another, and love as He loves us.

Comfort and heal all those who suffer in body, mind, or spirit ..., give them courage and hope in their troubles; and bring them the joy of Your salvation.

Hear us as we remember, those who have died in the faith of Christ ..., according to Your promises, grant us with them a share in Your eternal kingdom.

Rejoicing in the fellowship of (N. and of . . . ) all Your saints, we commend ourselves and all Christian people to Your unfailing love.

President:   Merciful Father.
All:           Accept these prayers for the sake of Your Son, our Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen.

OR

(b) President: Let us pray for the whole Church of God in Christ Jesus, and for all people according to their needs.

O God, the Creator and Preserver of all mankind, we pray for people of every race, and in every kind of need: make Your ways known on earth, Your saving power among all nations. (Especially we pray for ...). Lord in Your mercy.

All:  Hear our prayer.

We commend to Your Fatherly goodness, all who are anxious or distressed in mind or body; comfort and relieve them in their need; give them patience in their sufferings and bring good out of their troubles. (Especially we pray for )

Merciful Father.

All:  Accept these prayers for the sake of your Son, our Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen.

OR

(c) President: In the power of the Spirit and in union with Christ, let us pray to the Father.

All:   Hear our prayers, O Lord our God. Hear us, good Lord.

President:  Govern and direct Your holy Church, fill it with love and truth, and grant it that unity which is Your will.
All:          Hear us good Lord.

President:  Give us boldness to preach the gospel in all the world, and to make disciples of all the nations.
All:           Hear us good Lord.

President:  Enlighten Your ministers with knowledge and understanding, that by their teachings and their lives they may proclaim Your word.
All:          Hear us good Lord.

President:  Give Your people to hear and receive Your word, and to bring forth the fruit of the spirit.
All:           Hear us good Lord.

President:  Bring into the way of truth all who have erred and are deceived.
All:          Hear us good Lord.

President:  Strengthen those who stand; comfort and help the faint-hearted; raise up the fallen; and finally beat down satan under our feet.
All:           Hear us good Lord.

President:  Guide the leaders of the nations into the ways of peace and justice.
All:          Hear us good Lord.

President:  Bless Your servant the President of this nation and guide him with your heavenly wisdom.
All:          Hear us good Lord.

President:  Endue with grace, wisdom and understanding the State Governors, the Federal Ministers, State Commissioners, members of National and State Assemblies, Traditional Rulers, Local Government Chairmen, Councilors and all in authority in this land.
All:          Hear us good Lord.

President:  Bless the judges and magistrates and all who administer the law, that they may uphold justice, honesty and truth.
All:          Hear us good Lord.

President:  Teach us to use the fruits of the earth to Your glory, and for the good of all mankind.
All:          Hear us good Lord.

President:   Bless and keep all Your people.
All:            Hear us good Lord.

President:   Help and comfort the lonely, the bereaved, and the oppressed
All:           Hear us good Lord.

President:  Keep in safety those who travel, and all who are in danger.
All:           Hear us good Lord.

President:   Heal the sick in body and mind, and provide for the homeless, the hungry and the destitute.
All:           Hear us good Lord.

President:  Show Your pity on prisoners and refugees, and all who are in trouble.
All:          Hear us good Lord.

President:  Forgive our enemies, persecutors, and slanderers, and turn their hearts.
All:           Hear us good Lord.

President:  Hear us as we remember those who have died in the faith of Christ, both those who have confessed the faith and those whose faith is known to You alone, and grant us with them a share in Your eternal kingdom.
All:          Hear us good Lord.

President:  Father, you hear those who pray in the name of Your Son, grant that what we have asked in faith we may obtain according to Your will; through Jesus Christ our Lord.
All:          Amen.

President:  For the peace that is from above, and for the salvation of our souls, let us pray to the Lord.
All:           Lord have mercy.

President:  For the peace of the whole world, for the welfare of God’s holy Church, and for the union of all, let us pray to the Lord
All:           Lord have mercy.

President:  For our bishops and other ministers (especially N ... our Archbishop, and ... N ... our bishop) that with a good heart and a pure conscience they may accomplish their ministry, let us pray to the Lord.
All:           Lord have mercy.

President:  For the rulers of our country and all in authority, let us pray to the Lord.
All:           Lord have mercy.

President:   For the poor, the hungry, orphans and widows, and them that suffer persecution, let us pray to the Lord.
All:           Lord have mercy.

President:  For ourselves and all who confess the name of Christ, that we may show forth the excellencies of Him who called us out of darkness into His marvellous light, let us pray to the Lord.
All:           Lord have mercy.

President:  That, with all His servants who have served Him here and are now at rest, we may enter into fulness of His unending joy, let us pray to the Lord.
All:           Lord have mercy.

All:  Almighty God, the Fountain of all wisdom, who knows our necessities before we ask, and our ignorance in asking; we pray You to have compassion upon our infirmities; and those things, which for our unworthiness we dare not, and for our blindness we cannot ask, vouchsafe to give us, for the worthiness of Your Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

OR

(e) Two or more of the following prayers may be used in place of the litany.

Be mindful, O Lord, of Your people present here before You, and of those who are absent through age, sickness or infirmity. Care for the infants, guide the young, support the aged, encourage the faint-hearted, gather the scattered, and bring back the wandering to Your fold. Travel with the voyagers, defend the widows, shield the orphans, deliver the captives, heal the sick. Succour all who are in tribulation, necessity or distress. Remember for good all those that love us, and those that hate us; and those that have desired us, unworthy as we are, to pray for them. And those whom we have forgotten, please O Lord, remember. For You are the Helper of the helpless, the Saviour of the lost, the Refuge of the wanderer, the Healer of the sick. You who know each person’s need, and hear prayers, grant to each person according to Your merciful loving-kindness and Your eternal love; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Almighty and everlasting God, we praise You for all that You have done for us as a nation. Deepen the root of our national life in Your everlasting righteousness, let not Your blessings be withdrawn from us. Make us equal to our high trusts, reverent in the use of freedom, just in the exercise of power, and generous in the protection of the weak. Inspire the people who direct this local government, this state and this country, that they may guide us wisely and well; give insight and faithfulness to our legislators and judges both at the state and federal levels; and may our deepest trust ever be in You, the Lord of nations and the King of Kings; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Almighty God, who rules over all the kingdoms of the world, and do order them according to Your good pleasure: We give You hearty thanks that You have set ... N ... our traditional ruler, ... N ... our governor, and .... N ... our president in authority over your people. Let Your wisdom be their guide and Your arm strengthen them, le truth and justice, holiness and righteousness, peace and charity, abound in their days; and direct all their counsels and endeavours to Your glory, and the welfare of Your people; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Almighty God, we pray You with Your gracious favour to behold our universities, colleges and schools, that knowledge may be increased among us, and all good learning flourish and abound. Bless all who teach and all who learn, and grant that in humility of heart they may ever look to You, who are the Fountain of all wisdom through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O God who has given all people work to do, help them to do it with all their might. Grant the spirit of wisdom and justice to all leaders of industry. Bless the men and women who work in offices and factories; strengthen those who labour at the docks and in the farms; take care of the miners and those whose work is dangerous; and help us all to follow in the steps of Him who worked as carpenter, even Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Bestow Your blessing, we pray You, O Lord, upon Your Church and Your ministers everywhere. May increasing multitudes hear Your word, receive it, and live by it. May its power be seen more and more in the lives of them who believe. So work Your great work Almighty God, in this our country, and in this our generation, that the doubter may be convinced, the wavering established, the sinful converted and the gainsayer silenced; and grant that at the last, according to Your blessed word of Prophecy, the Lord may be King over all the earth, one Lord and His name one; through Jesus. Christ our Lord. Amen.

Almighty God, You have given us grace at this time with one accord to make our common supplication to You, and You have promised that when two or three are gathered together in Your name You will grant their requests. Fulfil now, O Lord, the desires and petitions of Your servants, as may be most expedient for them, granting us in this world knowledge of Your truth, and in the world to come, life everlasting. Amen.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of the Holy Spirit be with us all evermore. Amen.
 

 
4. THE MINISTRY OF THE SACRAMENT

All Stand: The President says either the following or other suitable words:

THE PEACE

President:   Christ is our peace.
He has reconciled us to God;
in one body by the cross.
We meet in His name and share His peace,

OR

President:   We are the body of Christ.
In the one Spirit we were all baptized into one body. Let us then pursue all that makes for peace and build up our common life.

He then says,

The Peace of the Lord be always with you.

All:            And also with you.
President:  Let us offer one another a sign of peace.

And all may exchange a sign of peace: African fraternal or traditional embrace or traditional handshake or double handclasp.
 

 
THE PREPARATION OF THE GIFTS

15. A Hymn or lyrics or choruses with or without musical accompaniment and dancing may follow as the Bread and Wine are brought by the representatives of the congregation to the Deacon or President. The People stand as the offerings are presented and placed on the Holy Table.

16. Ceremonial washing of hands may take place here. These words may be said as water is poured on the fingers.

President:  I wash my hands in innocence, O Lord,
that I may go about Your altar
and lift up the voice of thanksgiving. Amen.

The President takes the Bread and Cup into his hands and places them on the Holy Table.

At the offering of the Bread.

President:  Blessed are you, Lord, God of all creation
    Through Your goodness we have this bread to offer
    which the earth has given and human hands have made.
    It will become for us the Bread of Life.
All:  Blessed be God for ever. Amen.

At the offering of the Wine.

President:  Blessed are You Lord, God of all creation
    through Your goodness we have this wine to offer
    fruit of the vine and work of human hands.
    It will become our spiritual drink.
All:   Blessed be God for ever. Amen.

17. Then the President takes the offering in his hands and says with the people.

All: Yours, Lord, is the greatness, the power, the glory, the splendour, and the majesty; for everything in heaven and on earth is Yours. All things come from You, and of Your own do we give You.

OR

(b) President: Accept, we pray You, O Lord
these gifts which we here bring to You as the token of our love and gratitude; and grant that they may be so wisely used, that by them the work of Your Church may be prospered and Your kingdom enlarged; for the glory of Jesus Christ our Saviour. Amen.
 

 
18.
THE EUCHARISTIC PRAYER, THE TAKING OF
THE BREAD AND CUP AND THE GIVING OF THANKS
EUCHARISTIC PRAYER 1
(Congregation remains Standing,)
(The President faces the congregation and sings or says)

President:  The Lord be with you.
All:            And also with you.
President:  Lift up your hearts.
All:            We lift them to the Lord.
President:   Let us give thanks to the Lord our God.
All:             It is right to give Him thanks and praise.

President:   It is indeed right;
it is our duty and joy
at all times and in all places
to give You thanks and praise
Holy Father, heavenly King,
Almighty and eternal God
through Jesus Christ Your only Son our Lord,
For He is Your living Word;
through Him You have created all things
from the beginning,
and formed us in Your own image.
Through Him You have freed us
from the slavery of sin,
giving Him to be born as man
and to die upon the cross;
You raised Him from the dead
and exalted Him to Your right hand on high,
Through Him You have sent upon us
Your holy and life-giving Spirit,
and made us a people for Your own possession.

PROPER PREFACES: Here a Proper Preface is sung or said on all Sundays and on other occasions as appointed (see [the appendix — pp. 35-42](http://justus.anglican.org/resources/bcp/Nigeria_hc.htm#proper_prefaces).)

Therefore, with angels and archangels
and with all the company of heaven,
we proclaim Your great and glorious name,
for ever praising You and saying.

All:   Holy, Holy, Holy Lord, God of power and might, heaven and earth are full of Your glory, Hosanna in the highest.

This ANTHEM may also be used

President:   Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord.
All:             Hosanna in the highest.

(The congregation may kneel)
(The President continues)

President:   Accept our praises, heavenly Father, through
Your Son our Saviour Jesus Christ;
and as we follow His example
and obey His command,
grant that by the power of Your Holy Spirit
these gifts of bread and wine
may be to us His Body and Blood;
Who in the same night that He was betrayed,
took bread and gave You thanks;
He broke it and gave it to His disciples saying:
“Take, eat; this is my body which is given for you;
do this in remembrance of me,”
In the same way, after supper,
He took the cup and gave You thanks,
He gave it to them,
saying: “Drink this, all of you;
this is my blood of the new covenant,
which is shed for you and for many
for the forgiveness of sins.
Do this as often as you drink it,
in remembrance of me”.

Therefore we proclaim the mystery of faith.

All:   Christ has died,
Christ is risen;
Christ will come again.

President:   Therefore, heavenly Father,
we remember His offering of Himself
made once for all upon the cross;
and proclaim His mighty resurrection
and glorious ascension,
As we look for His coming in glory,
We celebrate with this bread and this cup
His one perfect sacrifice.

President continues

Accept through Him,
our great High Priest,
this our sacrifice of thanks and praise:
and as we eat and drink these holy gifts
in the presence of Your divine Majesty,
renew us by Your Spirit,
inspire us with Your love,
and unite us in the body of Your Son,
Jesus Christ our Lord.
Through Him, and with Him, and in Him,
by the power of the Holy Spirit
with all who stand before You
in earth and heaven.
we worship You, Father Almighty,
in songs of everlasting praise.

All:   Blessing and honour and glory and power
be Yours for ever and ever. Amen.

Silence may be kept.

OR
 

 
EUCHARISTIC PRAYER II

(b)
President:   The Lord be with you.
All:            And also with you.

President:  Lift up your hearts.
All:            We lift them to the Lord.

President:   Let us give thanks to our Lord God.
All:             It is meet and right so to do.

President:   It is very meet, right
and our bounden duty,
that we should at all times,
and in all places,
give thanks to You, O Lord,
Holy Father, Almighty and Everlasting God.

(Then follows this Preface, or another preface proper to the season)

Through Jesus Christ your Son our Lord,
through whom You did create the heaven and
the earth and all that is in them,
and did make man in Your Own image,
and when he had fallen into sin,
did redeem him to be the first fruit
of a new creation.

All:   Therefore with angels and archangels,
and with all the company of heaven,
we laud and magnify Your glorious name;
evermore praising You, and saying:
Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of hosts,
heaven and earth are full of Your glory,
glory be to You,
O Lord most high.

Blessed be He that has come
and is to come.
in the name of the Lord,
Hosannah in the highest.

President:  Truly holy, truly blessed are You,
O heavenly Father,
who of Your tender love towards mankind
did give Your only Son Jesus Christ
to take our nature upon him
and to suffer death upon the cross
for our redemption;
who made there,
by His one oblation of Himself once offered,
a full, perfect, and sufficient sacrifice,
oblation and satisfaction,
for the sins of the whole world:
and did institute
and in his Holy gospel command us to continue,
a perpetual memory of that his precious death,
until His coming again,
who, in the same night that He was betrayed, took bread,
and when He had given thanks, He broke it,
and gave it to His disciples saying,
“Take, eat,
this is my body which is given for you:
do this in remembrance of me”.
Likewise after supper He took the Cup,
and, when He had given thanks,
He gave it to them, saying, “Drink this all of you,
for this is my blood of the new covenant,
which is shed for you and for many
for the remission of sins,
do this, as often as you shall drink it,
in remembrance of me”

All:   Amen. Your death.
O Lord, we commemorate,
Your resurrection we confess,
and Your second coming we await
Glory be to You, O Christ.

President:  Wherefore, O Father, having in remembrance
the precious death and passion,
and glorious resurrection and
ascension of Your Son our Lord,
we Your servants do this in remembrance of Him,
as He had commanded.
Until His coming again,
giving thanks to You for the perfect
redemption which You have wrought for us in Him.

All:   We give thanks to You, we praise You,
we glorify You,
O Lord our God.

President:   And we most humbly pray You,
O merciful Father,
to sanctify with Your Holy Spirit,
us and these Your own gifts of bread and wine,
that the bread which we break
may be the communion of the body of Christ
and the cup which we bless
may be the communion of the blood of Christ,
Grant that being joined together in Him,
we may all attain to the unity of the faith,
and may grow up in all things
unto Him who is the Head,
even Christ, our Lord,
by Whom and with Whom
in the unity of the Holy Spirit
all honour and glory be unto You,
O Father Almighty, world without end.

All:    Amen.

Silence may be kept.
 

 
19. The President breaks the consecrated bread, saying:

President:  The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the Body of Christ?

He then lays his hand on the cup and says

(A) President: The cup which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ?

All:   Though we are many, we are one body, because we share in one Bread.

OR

(B) President: We break this bread to share in the Body of Christ.

All:    Though we are many, we are one body, because we share in one Bread.

Either here or during the distribution, one of the following anthems shall be said:

President:  Lamb of God, you take away the sins of the world.
All:            Have mercy on us
President:   Lamb of God, you take away the sins of the world.
All:            Have mercy on us
President:   Lamb of God, you take away the sins of the world.
All:            Grant us peace.

OR

Jesus, Lamb of God: have mercy on us.
Jesus, bearer of our sins: have mercy on us.
Jesus, redeemer of the world: give us Your peace.

20. PRAYER OF HUMBLE ACCESS

(All Kneeling)

All:  We do not presume
to come to Your table,
merciful Lord,
trusting in our own righteousness
but in Your manifold and great mercies.
We are not worthy so much
as to gather up the crumbs under Your table
But You are the same Lord,
whose nature is always to have mercy.
Grant us, therefore, gracious Lord,
so to eat the flesh of Your dear Son Jesus Christ,
and to drink His blood;
that we may evermore dwell in Him
and He in us. Amen.
 

 
21. THE DISTRIBUTION OF THE EUCHARISTIC ELEMENTS

Before the distribution, the President says:

Draw near with faith,
receive the Body of our Lord Jesus Christ which He gave you,
and His Blood which He shed for you.
Eat and drink in remembrance that He died for you.
and feed on Him in your heart by faith with thanksgiving.

OR

(b) President:  Holy things to Holy people,
If any is holy, let him come;
If any is not, let him repent.

All:    There is one holy,
One Lord Jesus Christ
to the glory of God the Father,
blessed for ever. Amen

22. The President and people receive the communion. At the distribution the minister says to each communicant.

The body of Christ keep you in eternal life
The blood of Christ keep you in eternal life

OR

The Body of Christ
The Blood of Christ

The communicant replies each time

Amen

and then receives.
 

23. During the distribution lyrics or hymns may be sung.
 

 
24. If either or both of the consecrated elements be likely to prove insufficient, the President himself returns to the holy table and adds more, saying these words.

(for bread)  Our Saviour, Christ,
in the same night he was betrayed,
took bread and gave you thanks;
He broke it and gave it to His disciples saying:
“Take, eat; this is my body which is given for you;
do this in remembrance of me”.

(for wine)    In the same way, after supper,
He took the cup and gave You thanks,
He gave it to them,
Saying: “Drink this all of you,
this is my blood of the new covenant,
which is shed for you and for many
for the forgiveness of sins.
Do this in remembrance of me.

OR

(for bread) Father, giving thanks over the bread and the cup according to the institution of Your Son Jesus Christ, who said, “Take, eat; this is my body, “we pray that this bread also may be to us His Body, to be received in remembrance of Him.

(for wine) Father, giving thanks over the bread and the cup according to the institution of Your Son Jesus Christ who said, Drink this; this is my blood, we pray that this wine also may be to us His blood, to be received in remembrance of Him.

25. A Hymn may be sung.

(Here any consecrated bread and wine which is not required for purposes of communion is consumed, otherwise it is consumed after the service)
 

 
AFTER COMMUNION

Appropriate sentence may be said here.

26. President: As our Saviour taught us, so we pray,

All:   Our Father in Heaven,
hallowed be Your name,
Your Kingdom come,
Your will be done on earth as in heaven.
Give us today our daily bread.
Forgive us our sins
as we forgive those who sin against us.
Lead us not into temptation
but deliver us from evil.
For the kingdom, the power and the glory
are Yours now and for ever. Amen.

27. Either or both of the follow prayers or other suitable prayer is said.

President:    Father of all,
    we give You thanks and praise,
    that when we were still far off
    You met us in Your Son and brought us home,
    Dying and living he declared Your love,
    gave us grace, and opened the gate of glory.
    May we who share Christ’s Body,
    live His risen life.
    We who drink His cup, bring life to others;
    We whom the Spirit lights give light to the world.
    Keep us firm in the hope you have set before us.
    So we and Your children shall be free,
    and the whole earth live to praise Your name:
    through Christ our Lord.
All:      Amen.

OR

All:    Almighty God,
We thank You for feeding us
with the Body and Blood of Your Son Jesus Christ.
Through Him we offer You our souls and bodies
to be a living sacrifice.
Send us out in the power of Your Spirit
to live and work to Your praise and glory.
Amen.

28. The President may say this or an alternative BLESSING

    The peace of God, which passes all understanding,
    keep your hearts and minds
    in the knowledge and love of God,
    and of His Son, Jesus Christ our Lord,
    and the blessing of God Almighty,
    the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit,
    be among you, and remain with you always.
All:   Amen.

29. A HYMN may be sung as the Ministers are processing out.

President:  Go in peace to love and serve the Lord.
All:            In the name of Christ, Amen.

OR

President:   Go in the peace of Christ
All:            Thanks be to God.
 